README-BuildingHowTo.md, before:

![LOGO](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Mindty-Kollektiv/tdme2/master/resources/github/tdme2-logo.png)

# 1. How to build TDME2?

## 1.1. FreeBSD(tested on FreeBSD 13.0)
### 1.1.1 Install packages

```bash
su
pkg install git
pkg install gmake
pkg install openal-soft
pkg install glfw
pkg install glew
pkg install freetype2
pkg install openssl
exit
```

#### 1.1.1.1 Vulkan

```bash
su
pkg install vulkan-headers
pkg install vulkan-loader
exit
```

### 1.1.2. Clone repository

```bash
git clone https://github.com/Mindty-Kollektiv/tdme2
cd tdme2
```

### 1.1.3. Build

Note:
- HARDWARE_THREADS should be replaced with the number of your CPU hardware threads, e.g. if you have 2 cores and hyperthreading, you can use 4
- About YES|NO, just choose to type YES or NO, this enables the renderer plugin to be build additionally to GL3+/CORE renderer plugin.

```bash
gmake clean && gmake -j HARDWARE_THREADS mains VULKAN=YES|NO GLES2=YES|NO
```

## 1.2. OpenBSD(tested on OpenBSD 6.8)
### 1.2.1 Install packages

```bash
su
pkg_add git
pkg_add gmake
pkg_add glew
pkg_add openal
pkg_add glfw
pkg_add freetype2
pkg_add openssl
exit
```

### 1.2.2. Clone repository

```bash
git clone https://github.com/Mindty-Kollektiv/tdme2
cd tdme2
```

### 1.2.3. Build

Note: HARDWARE_THREADS should be replaced with the number of your CPU hardware threads, e.g. if you have 2 cores, you can use 2.

```bash
gmake clean && gmake -j HARDWARE_THREADS mains CXX=clang++ CC=clang
```

## 1.3. Ubuntu(tested on Ubuntu 20.04)
### 1.3.1 Install packages

```bash
sudo apt-get install git
sudo apt-get install make
sudo apt-get install g++
sudo apt-get install libopenal-dev
sudo apt-get install libglfw3-dev
sudo apt-get install libglew-dev
sudo apt-get install libfreetype-dev
sudo apt-get install libxml2-dev
sudo apt-get install libssl-dev
```

#### 1.3.1.1 Vulkan

```bash
sudo apt-get install libvulkan-dev
```


### 1.3.2. Clone repository

```bash
git clone https://github.com/Mindty-Kollektiv/tdme2
cd tdme2
```

### 1.3.3. Build

Note:
- HARDWARE_THREADS should be replaced with the number of your CPU hardware threads, e.g. if you have 2 cores and hyperthreading, you can use 4
- About YES|NO, just choose to type YES or NO, this enables the renderer plugin to be build additionally to GL3+/CORE renderer plugin.

```bash
make clean && make -j HARDWARE_THREADS mains VULKAN=YES|NO GLES2=YES|NO
```

## 1.4. Mac OS X
### 1.4.1 Install packages

You have to install XCode or XCode command line tools.

### 1.4.1.1 Metal via Vulkan

For Metal via Vulkan you need to install Vulkan SDK for MacOSX using the installer script.

### 1.4.2. Clone repository

```bash
git clone https://github.com/Mindty-Kollektiv/tdme2
cd tdme2
```

### 1.4.3. Build

Note:
- HARDWARE_THREADS should be replaced with the number of your CPU hardware threads, e.g. if you have 2 cores and hyperthreading, you can use 4
- About YES|NO, just choose to type YES or NO, this enables the renderer plugin to be build additionally to GL3+/CORE renderer plugin.
- VULKAN=YES builds Vulkan renderer plugin, which uses Metal via Vulkan

```bash
make clean && make -j HARDWARE_THREADS mains VULKAN=YES|NO
```

## 1.5. Windows MSYS2/MINGW64(tested on Windows 10 Pro)

Note: TDME2 physics using ReactPhysics3D is currently broken with current MSYS2/MINGW64 GCC on Windows 11.  However we will switch to MSC for Windows very soon I guess.

### 1.5.1 Install packages
Install 64 Bit MSYS2 from https://www.msys2.org/, e.g. msys2-x86_64-20190524.exe, then update your MSYS2 installation and install packages.

```bash 
pacman -Syu
pacman -S git
pacman -S make
pacman -S mingw-w64-x86_64-gcc
pacman -S mingw-w64-x86_64-openal
pacman -S mingw-w64-x86_64-glfw
pacman -S mingw-w64-x86_64-glew
pacman -S mingw-w64-x86_64-dlfcn
pacman -S mingw-w64-x86_64-freetype
pacman -S mingw-w64-x86_64-openssl
```

#### 1.5.1.1 Vulkan

```bash
pacman -S mingw-w64-x86_64-vulkan-headers
pacman -S mingw-w64-x86_64-vulkan-loader
```

### 1.5.2. Clone repository

```bash
git clone https://github.com/Mindty-Kollektiv/tdme2
cd tdme2
```

### 1.5.3. Build

Note:
- HARDWARE_THREADS should be replaced with the number of your CPU hardware threads, e.g. if you have 2 cores and hyperthreading, you can use 4
- About YES|NO, just choose to type YES or NO, this enables the renderer plugin to be build additionally to GL3+/CORE renderer plugin.

```bash
make clean && make -j HARDWARE_THREADS mains VULKAN=YES|NO
```

## 1.6. Windows MSC/X64(tested on Windows 10 Pro)
### 1.6.1 Install packages
Install Visual Studio 2022 Community Edition for C++ development, including MSVC v143 and Windows 10 SDK(10.0.19041.0).
Be aware that the makefile uses the default installation paths for libraries and headers.

### 1.6.2. Download or clone repository

Use a GIT client with the following URL: https://github.com/Mindty-Kollektiv/tdme2 and clone to a folder into your home folder like "tdme2" OR 
send your browser to "https://github.com/Mindty-Kollektiv/tdme2" and click "Clone or download/Download ZIP" and extract ZIP somewhere in your home folder, e.g. "tdme2".

### 1.6.3. Build

Open your Visual Studio 2022 Community command line interface app for native X64 builds and execute the following commands. 
You need to adjust "tdme2" if you used a different folder. Also you need to extract ext/windows-msc/tools.zip to ext/windows-msc using 7zip or manually.

```
cd %HOMEPATH%/tdme2
cd ./ext/windows-msc && 7z x tools.zip && cd ../..
nmake -f Makefile.nmake
```

This will build TDME2 executables into your "tdme2" folder. You need to copy DLLs still to this folder, just that those dependencies are found.
Also this will build Vulkan renderer plugin as well as dependencies are included in TDME2 repository and its quite cheap to do so.
You need to adjust "tdme2" if you used a different folder.

```
cd %HOMEPATH%\tdme2
.\scripts\windows-prepare-platform-libs.bat
copy .\platform\libs\* .
copy .\lib\* .
```

### 1.6.4. Note
- All *.EXE files are generated in your "tdme2" folder root. You should just be able to launch them from there. So you can ignore 2.1, 2.2 and 2.3.
- The MSC build process is WIP

# 2. Running a TDME2 binary

You find binaries in
- ./bin/tdme/tests/
- ./bin/tdme/tools/cli
- ./bin/tdme/tools/editor
- ./bin/tdme/tools/installer

## 2.1. Unix-like platforms

On Unix like platforms you need to set up LD_LIBRARY_PATH, just that TDME2 libs and renderer plugins are found.

```bash
$ pwd
/usr/home/andreas/Development/drewke.net/tdme2
$ export LD_LIBRARY_PATH=`pwd`/lib
```

## 2.2. MacOSX

On MacOSX you need to set up DYLD_LIBRARY_PATH, just that TDME2 libs and renderer plugins are found.

```bash
$ pwd
/usr/home/andreas/Development/drewke.net/tdme2
$ export DYLD_LIBRARY_PATH=`pwd`/lib
```

## 2.3. MSYS2/MINGW64

On MSYS2/MINGW64 you need to copy shared objects files to TDME2 folder, just that TDME2 libs and renderer plugins are found.

```bash
$ pwd
/usr/home/andreas/Development/drewke.net/tdme2
$ cp ./lib/*.dll .
```

## 2.4. Execute TDME2 binaries

You have to execute the binaries from tdme2 root folder like:

```bash
$ pwd
/usr/home/andreas/Development/drewke.net/tdme2
$ ./bin/tdme/tests/AngleTest
```

## 2.4.1 Setting the renderer plugin

There are currently 4 renderer plugins available, if they have been built:
- OpenGL ES2, choose via "--gles2"
- OpenGL 2, choose via "--gl2"
- OpenGL 3+/CORE (default), but can be issued also with "--gl3core"
- Vulkan, choose via "--vulkan"

Example: If you want to start TDMEEditor with Vulkan, just do the following:

```bash
$ pwd
/usr/home/andreas/Development/drewke.net/tdme2
$ ./bin/tdme/tools/editor/TDMEEditor --vulkan
```

# 3. Other information
## 3.1. Links
- TDME2 Philosophy, see [README-Philosophy.md](./README-Philosophy.md)
- TDME2 Engine, see [README.md](./README.md)
- TDME2 Editor, see [README-Editor.md](./README-Editor.md)
- TDME2 How to build, see [README-BuildingHowTo.md](./README-BuildingHowTo.md)
- TDME2 Screenshots, see [README-Screenshots.md](./README-Screenshots.md)

## 3.2. Additional notes
- Build instructions will follow for NetBSD and Haiku if they get more recent graphics card support
- Vulkan: First start of a TDME2 application will create Vulkan shader caches, please be patient as this can take a moment

Commit message:

README*: Added our Mindty Kollektiv Discord Server

README-BuildingHowTo.md, after:

![LOGO](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Mindty-Kollektiv/tdme2/master/resources/github/tdme2-logo.png)

# 1. How to build TDME2?

## 1.1. FreeBSD(tested on FreeBSD 13.0)

### 1.1.1 Install packages

```bash
su
pkg install git
pkg install gmake
pkg install openal-soft
pkg install glfw
pkg install glew
pkg install freetype2
pkg install openssl
exit
```

#### 1.1.1.1 Vulkan

```bash
su
pkg install vulkan-headers
pkg install vulkan-loader
exit
```

### 1.1.2. Clone repository

```bash
git clone https://github.com/Mindty-Kollektiv/tdme2
cd tdme2
```

### 1.1.3. Build

Note:
- HARDWARE_THREADS should be replaced with the number of your CPU hardware threads, e.g. if you have 2 cores and hyperthreading, you can use 4
- About YES|NO, just choose to type YES or NO, this enables the renderer plugin to be build additionally to GL3+/CORE renderer plugin.

```bash
gmake clean && gmake -j HARDWARE_THREADS mains VULKAN=YES|NO GLES2=YES|NO
```

## 1.2. OpenBSD(tested on OpenBSD 6.8)

### 1.2.1 Install packages

```bash
su
pkg_add git
pkg_add gmake
pkg_add glew
pkg_add openal
pkg_add glfw
pkg_add freetype2
pkg_add openssl
exit
```

### 1.2.2. Clone repository

```bash
git clone https://github.com/Mindty-Kollektiv/tdme2
cd tdme2
```

### 1.2.3. Build

Note: HARDWARE_THREADS should be replaced with the number of your CPU hardware threads, e.g. if you have 2 cores, you can use 2.

```bash
gmake clean && gmake -j HARDWARE_THREADS mains CXX=clang++ CC=clang
```

## 1.3. Ubuntu(tested on Ubuntu 20.04)

### 1.3.1 Install packages

```bash
sudo apt-get install git
sudo apt-get install make
sudo apt-get install g++
sudo apt-get install libopenal-dev
sudo apt-get install libglfw3-dev
sudo apt-get install libglew-dev
sudo apt-get install libfreetype-dev
sudo apt-get install libxml2-dev
sudo apt-get install libssl-dev
```

#### 1.3.1.1 Vulkan

```bash
sudo apt-get install libvulkan-dev
```

### 1.3.2. Clone repository

```bash
git clone https://github.com/Mindty-Kollektiv/tdme2
cd tdme2
```

### 1.3.3. Build

Note:
- HARDWARE_THREADS should be replaced with the number of your CPU hardware threads, e.g. if you have 2 cores and hyperthreading, you can use 4
- About YES|NO, just choose to type YES or NO, this enables the renderer plugin to be build additionally to GL3+/CORE renderer plugin.

```bash
make clean && make -j HARDWARE_THREADS mains VULKAN=YES|NO GLES2=YES|NO
```

## 1.4. Mac OS X

### 1.4.1 Install packages

You have to install XCode or XCode command line tools.

### 1.4.1.1 Metal via Vulkan

For Metal via Vulkan you need to install Vulkan SDK for MacOSX using the installer script.

### 1.4.2. Clone repository

```bash
git clone https://github.com/Mindty-Kollektiv/tdme2
cd tdme2
```

### 1.4.3. Build

Note:
- HARDWARE_THREADS should be replaced with the number of your CPU hardware threads, e.g. if you have 2 cores and hyperthreading, you can use 4
- About YES|NO, just choose to type YES or NO, this enables the renderer plugin to be build additionally to GL3+/CORE renderer plugin.
- VULKAN=YES builds Vulkan renderer plugin, which uses Metal via Vulkan

```bash
make clean && make -j HARDWARE_THREADS mains VULKAN=YES|NO
```

## 1.5. Windows MSYS2/MINGW64(tested on Windows 10 Pro)

### 1.5.1 Install packages

Install 64 Bit MSYS2 from https://www.msys2.org/, e.g. msys2-x86_64-20190524.exe, then update your MSYS2 installation and install packages.

```bash 
pacman -Syu
pacman -S git
pacman -S make
pacman -S mingw-w64-x86_64-gcc
pacman -S mingw-w64-x86_64-openal
pacman -S mingw-w64-x86_64-glfw
pacman -S mingw-w64-x86_64-glew
pacman -S mingw-w64-x86_64-dlfcn
pacman -S mingw-w64-x86_64-freetype
pacman -S mingw-w64-x86_64-openssl
```

#### 1.5.1.1 Vulkan

```bash
pacman -S mingw-w64-x86_64-vulkan-headers
pacman -S mingw-w64-x86_64-vulkan-loader
```

### 1.5.2. Clone repository

```bash
git clone https://github.com/Mindty-Kollektiv/tdme2
cd tdme2
```

### 1.5.3. Build

Note:
- HARDWARE_THREADS should be replaced with the number of your CPU hardware threads, e.g. if you have 2 cores and hyperthreading, you can use 4
- About YES|NO, just choose to type YES or NO, this enables the renderer plugin to be build additionally to GL3+/CORE renderer plugin.

```bash
make clean && make -j HARDWARE_THREADS mains VULKAN=YES|NO
```

## 1.6. Windows MSC/X64(tested on Windows 10 Pro)

### 1.6.1 Install packages

Install Visual Studio 2022 Community Edition for C++ development, including MSVC v143 and Windows 10 SDK(10.0.19041.0).
Be aware that the makefile uses the default installation paths for libraries and headers.

### 1.6.2. Download or clone repository

Use a GIT client with the following URL: https://github.com/Mindty-Kollektiv/tdme2 and clone to a folder into your home folder like "tdme2" OR 
send your browser to "https://github.com/Mindty-Kollektiv/tdme2" and click "Clone or download/Download ZIP" and extract ZIP somewhere in your home folder, e.g. "tdme2".

### 1.6.3. Build

Open your Visual Studio 2022 Community command line interface app for native X64 builds and execute the following commands. 
You need to adjust "tdme2" if you used a different folder. Also you need to extract ext/windows-msc/tools.zip to ext/windows-msc using 7zip or manually.

```
cd %HOMEPATH%/tdme2
cd ./ext/windows-msc && 7z x tools.zip && cd ../..
nmake -f Makefile.nmake
```

This will build TDME2 executables into your "tdme2" folder. You need to copy DLLs still to this folder, just that those dependencies are found.
Also this will build Vulkan renderer plugin as well as dependencies are included in TDME2 repository and its quite cheap to do so.
You need to adjust "tdme2" if you used a different folder.

```
cd %HOMEPATH%\tdme2
.\scripts\windows-prepare-platform-libs.bat
copy .\platform\libs\* .
copy .\lib\* .
```

### 1.6.4. Note

- All *.EXE files are generated in your "tdme2" folder root. You should just be able to launch them from there. So you can ignore 2.1, 2.2 and 2.3.
- The MSC build process is WIP

# 2. Running a TDME2 binary

You find binaries in
- ./bin/tdme/tests/
- ./bin/tdme/tools/cli
- ./bin/tdme/tools/editor
- ./bin/tdme/tools/installer

## 2.1. Unix-like platforms

On Unix like platforms you need to set up LD_LIBRARY_PATH, just that TDME2 libraries and renderer plugins are found.

```bash
$ pwd
/usr/home/andreas/Development/mindty.com/tdme2
$ export LD_LIBRARY_PATH=`pwd`/lib
```

## 2.2. MacOSX

On MacOSX you need to set up DYLD_LIBRARY_PATH, just that TDME2 libraries and renderer plugins are found.

```bash
$ pwd
/usr/home/andreas/Development/mindty.com/tdme2
$ export DYLD_LIBRARY_PATH=`pwd`/lib
```

## 2.3. MSYS2/MINGW64

On MSYS2/MINGW64 you need to copy shared objects files to TDME2 folder, just that TDME2 libraries and renderer plugins are found.

```bash
$ pwd
/usr/home/andreas/Development/mindty.com/tdme2
$ cp ./lib/*.dll .
```

## 2.4. Execute TDME2 binaries

You have to execute the binaries from tdme2 root folder like:

```bash
$ pwd
/usr/home/andreas/Development/mindty.com/tdme2
$ ./bin/tdme/tests/AngleTest
```

## 2.4.1 Setting the renderer plugin

There are currently 4 renderer plugins available, if they have been built:
- OpenGL ES2, choose via "--gles2"
- OpenGL 2, choose via "--gl2"
- OpenGL 3+/CORE (default), but can be issued also with "--gl3core"
- Vulkan, choose via "--vulkan"

Example: If you want to start TDMEEditor with Vulkan, just do the following:

```bash
$ pwd
/usr/home/andreas/Development/mindty.com/tdme2
$ ./bin/tdme/tools/editor/TDMEEditor --vulkan
```

# 3. Other information

## 3.1. Links

- TDME2 Philosophy, see [README-Philosophy.md](./README-Philosophy.md)
- TDME2 Engine, see [README.md](./README.md)
- TDME2 Editor, see [README-Editor.md](./README-Editor.md)
- TDME2 How to build, see [README-BuildingHowTo.md](./README-BuildingHowTo.md)
- TDME2 Screenshots, see [README-Screenshots.md](./README-Screenshots.md)

## 3.2. Additional notes

- Build instructions will follow for NetBSD and Haiku if they get more recent graphics card support
- Vulkan: First start of a TDME2 application will create Vulkan shader caches, please be patient as this can take a moment
